Just that way it'll save me time from... You're saying it, we're talking Abel from Orlando, and you said you're talking about in this room or... Yeah, this is what I call my study, which is a sort of a euphemistic term, but it's the room which contains bibliographies, bearing on the books in my library, books about books, catalogs of important sales,
far more important than anything in my library, but sales that in some degree at least are comparable to some of the books that I have.
Some of them are historic sales.
Many of them are historic sales.
And books of reference.
And to me it's important because it tells me the political and economic and social circumstances that produced the books in the other room.
When I read Milton's poems, the 1645 edition, I'd like to know something about the historical circumstances and the climate of opinion during which time he wrote the book.
Otherwise it doesn't mean anything to me.
So that's what you get in this room?
That's what I get in this room.
I want to know the social, the economic, the political circumstances of the books.
This is where the work is done.
And then you go in there to appreciate and disable it.
And I take it out.
I'm relearning Latin.
And because many of, especially of the, nearly all of the Incanabula, except for the Caxton, are in Latin or in Italian or in German.
And being able to, I understand that.
It means something more to me than just being an icon or an artifact.
Well, it's a living thing for you, then, a book, I guess.
As you say, a book becomes a living thing for you.
Exactly.
Otherwise, it would mean nothing to me.
I mean, otherwise, I might just as well go to a museum and look at some of these books or to a great university or institutional library.
But if I'm going to have them on my shelves, I want to know something about them more than just their
how rare they are if they are or who wrote them I want to know how do they happen to come into being what circumstances produce them does it matter to have something when did you decide that having the earliest possible edition meant something obviously you read the books in here but but but does it mean something to read them in its earliest edition for you yes
It brings me into that time warp, if you will, that time frame in which the book was written.
You get a special feeling, I'm sure, that Milton's poems have been reprinted hundreds of times.
But if I pick up the copy which is in my library,
I'm holding in my hand a 17th century book.
This is the book that he may have seen, in this case he did not, may have seen through the press.
It's important to me because this connects me in a very special way with the author.
It gives me a better appreciation of what he's trying to say.
It's almost like my having a conversation with you here.
Instead of on the telephone,
or via correspondence.
There's something personal about this kind of thing.
Since John Milton can't be brought back to life, his book.
You see, the title of my new book is going to have a Milton quote, Life Beyond Life, which is from the Ariel Paginica.
You know, he said, the precious life, the blood of a master spirit, which is what a book is.
He talked about the book as being precious.
Which gives you a life beyond life.
The book allows you to have a life beyond life, and that's exactly what you're saying right now.
The fact that Milton is able to live 300 or so years later.
That's why this room is important to me.
Maybe more important, I think I would be able to survive in a literary sense much better in this room, much as I love the books in the other room.
But I connect with these books in a very intimate, a very special way.
And if I didn't have the other books, I could still enjoy reading about them, studying them.
I like the idea of connecting with them on a personal level.
So what comes first, the studying of the book and then the acquisition of it as a treat for yourself?
Or do you acquire the book and then try to learn as much as you can about it?
Well, it's been a two-way street.
Sometimes I acquire the book first.
because I read it in college or in high school or something.
Take John Milton, since I'm talking about Milton, and then acquire material about Milton in this room.
Sometimes, as a result of my readings here, I have been tempted to, you ask me, but what's on my want list?
My readings here on science, both from catalogs and from books of reference,
has triggered my desire to have a Copernicus in first edition.
Now you've said that three times today, so this must really be burning on you to get a Copernicus.
It is.
You know Haskell Norman?
Yes.
I know his son, Jeremy.
Jeremy is his son.
I don't know Haskell.
Haskell believes that to be the one great book he's never been able to get.
Has not been able to get it?
He has not been able to get it.
He had one once,
which he bought from Warren Howell, which turned out to be stolen from here in Chicago.
He bought it unknowingly, of course, and returned it when he knew.
But what amazes me is that Howell actually sold it to him.
Howell should have maybe researched it a little better on the provenance, but who's to know?
I knew Warren Howell well.
He was as honest as the days long.
Oh yeah, no, nobody suggests that there was anything.
The guy was a very clever con man.
He came to him.
Warren was calling me every day to share his problems with me.
get my reassurance, want to make sure that I didn't think he was a crook, which I never would have thought in any circumstances.
He was one of the outstanding citizens of San Francisco.
That's true.
We were at his funeral at the Grace Cathedral in San Francisco, and there wasn't a dry eye and there wasn't a seat that was vacant.
He was a tremendous man.
It's too bad that had to happen to him.
That stress must have accelerated his demise.
But this guy comes in and tells his story, which made some sense.
It had been, Meredith, have you met Nick Bassmanes?
We met, we met.
Okay.
He comes up with this story that this is in a library in East Germany that belonged to his family and it had been smuggled out of East Germany
Because the family needed the money, and Warren Howell was so certain about his legitimacy, he met him here at O'Hare.
Warren was on his way to New York, and this guy was coming in from someplace else.
They met at O'Hare.
And he had a batch of these books, including the Harvey, in hand.
And Warren looked at them and agreed to purchase them.
And he had this thief deliver them to Ken Ebenzal, who was a trustee of the Queer Air Library, for Ken to have packed in his shop and to ship to Warren in San Francisco.
Now, if he had thought that he was accepting stolen merchandise, would he have asked that these books be delivered to Ken Ebenzal?
I mean, Ken didn't see anything.
Who knows?
He was busy, involved, there were no marks of ownership that he could, you know, the things that happened in our office, people come and, you know, when I was president of the company at one time, I was so busy I didn't have time to go to the bathroom.
And it's entirely possible that... But Haskell was the one who got that book.
Haskell Norman was the person who bought that.
And then he had to release it.
The only one that has not been released is the one that Haven O'Moore bought.
That's right.
Which is the Harvey that I'm talking about, the first edition.
And it's still, I guess, on the shelves of either Haven O'Moore or the guy who funded the collection, Davis.
I don't think so.
I think Haven keeps it.
Davis.
Maybe Davis kept it.
Probably.
He put the money up to begin with.
Yeah, but...
Owen Gingrich mentioned that very same thing the other day.
He suspects that Havens has it.
Probably.
And eventually it'll end up back at the U.S.
Yeah, the agreement was he gets to keep it, I guess, as long as he's alive.
I guess that was the arrangement.
I don't know why he wanted to keep it.
He put up a big fight.
I guess he figured he'd pay for it.
Paid a big price.
It was carefully researched by Warren Howell.
It's a very rare book, as you know.
That's the book that Gingrich is starting to work on now, in terms of trying to find every one that he can.
It's an interesting scenario, not only to try and find every book, but to see what annotations might be in it.
That's what makes the book especially interesting, particularly when a scholar is doing the kind of research that Gingrich is doing.
So I'm going to include him in the next book.
I love this room.
This is a delightful room.
Look, it's very comfortable.
You've got personal things in here.
It's not austere in any way.
It's very comfortable.
You sit here, right in here?
I sit right there, exactly where you're sitting.
And you absorb yourselves.
Well, it's complete diversion, and it takes me into another dimension.
How long have you lived out here?
Where?
Out here in Glencoe?
I think 40 years, 41 years.
40 years.
We used to live in South Glencoe before we lived here.
I see.
Did you have a larger library once upon a time?
Yeah, well, we had a two-story house, but this is much better.
This is a ranch house.
So you call this the study and that's the library?
Then in my bedroom I have...
reading copies of books and things like that.
It's a small library, but it's something that means a lot to me personally.
It didn't look small to me.
I noticed also that you had the Pforzheimer catalog in there, which is a very, very scarce catalog.
I bought it from Fleming.
And, you know, if you're collecting English literature... You have to have that catalog.
You've got to have that catalog, especially early English literature.
And they've never reprinted it.
It's a rare book.
It is a very rare book.
They were selling it for $25 a copy.
Well, it's a lot more than that now, I can tell you.
I mean, when it was issued.
That's amazing.
In 1940.
It's now, but it ranges in price between $5,000 to $10,000.
Yeah, Oknole had one.
I saw it.
$5,000 to $10,000.
Yeah, it was too stiff for me.
That looks like the...
Estelle Doheny.
Yes.
And I see the Bradley Martin.
Bradley Martin.
And there's the garden.
See, I know them just by the spines.
And the Streeter catalog.
I have Bradley Martin's Streeter catalog.
I bought that at his sale.
I was very pleased to get something out of that sale.
Very nice.
This is my junk room.
I also, this table, and I'll let you look at it shortly, I...
have hornbooks that are in this table.
Let me just pull this aside.
There never is enough room.
Take a look at that.
Come over here.
Oh, you have them right there on the table.
Yeah, they're in the table.
Oh my goodness.
All the way through.
Let me hold this.
Oh, there they are.
Now that opens up.
I don't think I can get it out.
No, I see it.
I've seen them.
It opens up and there's a creche there.
And there are two religious figures, nuns or monks, one on either side.
Don't open the table.
I've seen them before.
Well, all of these are hornbooks.
And you had the table designed?
Yeah.
No, I'm sorry.
I bought the table from the man who sold me the hornbooks.
I see.
Who was a great collector.
He has the Furtzheimer Shelley catalog as well, which is very important.
Look at them.
Walk around.
Take a look at the books that are in this room.
We will.
I just feel so comfortable in here, I have to say.
I've got Gibbons Library.
Lovely.
I love my books on books, too, I have to say.
I think I have most of these.
I'm sure you do.
Look to your right there on the top shelf.
I think you'll recognize there's an author there.
Yeah, I see it.
Later on, I'm going to ask you to inscribe it for me.
I brought my fountain pen with me to do that, and it will be my pleasure.
It will be my pleasure.
It's a beautiful label.
Thank you.
So now, are you re-learning Latin or learning Latin?
Re-learning.
And with the help of a couple of dictionaries.
You can't read old, ancient Latin.
It's different than modern Latin.
But I get enough of the sense of something.
And being able to pick up a book, whether it's the Decivitati Dei or Summa Theologica or any important book, and being able to refer to a paragraph or
or two, which gives me the essence of what the man is trying to say, and being able to read it, the original, with help.
With help.
We all need help.
Were you always planning to be a businessman?
I mean, how is it that you became so fascinated by books and reading them in their original ways?
When I was in the second grade, and this is a true story, when I was in the second grade I had a teacher whose name was O'Brien.
And she's as vivid to me now as you are.
She must have been in her middle thirties at the time.
She had black hair streaked with gray, she's just as, just so much alive, so vivid, and huge blue eyes, big as saucers.
And she really was a frustrated actress.
And she would read to us.
This was second grade.
We were seven years old.
One of the books she read to us was Christopher Morley's Parnassus on Wheels.
Which I have.
You must have it.
I do.
I have it first edition.
And she made the book come alive.
She just didn't read it.
She acted it.
Like the Broadway stage.
Now there must have been 40 kids in the class.
I don't know who else
was as affected as was I, but I had an epiphany.
It was something that just, I think you have to be predisposed.
I think it has to be, the ground has to be fertile to begin with.
It has to be ready to receive the seedlings.
I think so.
Or seeds.
I don't know whether any of the others, I doubt whether any of the other kids, they probably forgot before they walked out of the classroom.
But that impacted me in a way that I remember today, a hundred years after the fact.
And that was the beginning of my downfall.
And I began to read.
Of course, I was a reader.
I was always a reader.
I read everything.
Everything.
Encyclopedia, almanacs, boys' books, you name it.
All of the things that...
The kids read.
And I'd read sometimes a dozen books, a dozen books a week, literally.
This is just an aside.
I'd go into the bathroom, and I'd read.
My mother was afraid I'd get hemorrhoids.
So she'd knock on the door, and she'd always threatened to tear up the book.
So I...
would secrete it in the beginning I secreted it under my shirt put my shirt over my trousers as a young kid it wasn't long before she found my hiding place she never taught the book of course it went on and she'd knock on the door I'm telling your son this time I really mean it and we had a humongous laundry basket in the bathroom so I secreted the book I was reading among the dirty laundry
and then would retrieve it later on.
She found that.
Did not tear up the book.
Just threatened.
She was afraid I was going to comply in reading so much.
One day she was pounding on the door and she says, Son, this time I mean it.
I have said this a hundred times, but this time I mean it.
I'm going to tear the book up.
I told you I don't want you reading in the bathroom.
You have plenty of time to read during the day.
I said,
I felt that this time she did mean it.
What to do?
She knew my hiding places on my person, and she knew about the laundry basket.
There was no other place to hide it in the bathroom.
Suddenly, out of flash of inspiration, we had an opaque window, as you would normally do in all bathrooms.
So I raised the opaque window, put it out on the outer ledge, and closed the window.
My mother searched me.
She did search you, huh?
Searched the laundry basket, could not find it.
There was nothing to be found.
I went to sleep with the idea that as soon as mother and dad had fallen asleep, I'd go back to the bathroom, retrieve the book, and that would be it.
But I was young, and I was tired, and I fell asleep.
I got up at 6 o'clock in the morning, and I was frantic.
I was just beside myself, and I ran immediately to the bathroom.
And it stepped into the bathtub because the window was on the other side of the bathtub.
Raised the window.
And I was heartbroken.
It had snowed during the night.
And the book was wet and warped.
I had it until a few years ago.
I was just beside myself.
Because I was a nut.
When I would get a book, even if I'd get it from the library, but particularly if I was gifted with a book, I would immediately prepare...
a dust jacket for it.
My mother would send out her laundry of flat work.
They didn't have laundry machines like they do now.
You either have to do it by hand or you send it out to the laundry.
And when it came back, the pillowcases and sheets and things like that, and towels, when they came back, they were usually wrapped in heavy brown paper.
That brown paper was mine.
I had dibs on it.
I would cut it up and I'd make it into a dust jacket so that I would not soil
the covers of the book or dampen in any way or hurt the legend on the spine so I was a real fuss budget but if that didn't help my book which was Tarzan of the Apes that I had spent a quarter for from Jerry Nedwick it didn't help my book it was soaked solid still during the night but I was always a nut about these about books and I read omnivorously there wasn't
Just everything.
And I'm the love of Shakespeare.
It was also induced by a teacher whose name was Elizabeth Waters.
Elizabeth K. Waters, God rest her soul in peace, who was my sophomore teacher in high school.
And she had a habit when she wanted to give you an assignment.
She'd say, Prince of Chicago, Nick, I want you to do so and so.
She'd start always, Prince of Chicago, let's take the curse off of it.
By calling you the Prince of Chicago, you felt good, and then you felt bad when she gave you the assignment.
But that's how she would start.
Or if it was a girl, she would call her Miss Chicago.
That was the way she did.
One day she says, Prince of Chicago, you're going to do King Lear for me.
You're going to report on it to class, and you're going to write a report, and you're going to submit the report before you write.
That's a tough play, as you know.
I spent I don't know how many hours in the library and reading and trying to get some handle on it.
For one thing, reading Shakespeare is not easy to begin with.
And reading and understanding King Lear is, for a 15-year-old kid, is a very tough job.
It was for me anyway.
I was not that smart that I could read it and immediately know what he was trying to say.
But I worked my duff off in order to write the report.
and then to give the oral in the class.
And just as Miss O'Brien triggered my love of books by reading to us from Parnassus on Wheels, just in the same manner and measure, Miss Waters, who assigned King Lear to me, opened up this wellspring of love that I
I've never been able to satiate for Mr. Shakespeare.
But that's how I got involved in Shakespeare.
From a very early age?
So it wasn't anything in school or anything like that?
Well, there was.
But I mean in terms of like formal study of English literature and college or something.
Later on I read and took courses like everyone else, including great books when I became a young man and that kind of thing.
That was my opening, my introduction.
And I really sweated.
And I didn't think I'd ever like it because it was so difficult for me at the age of 15 to understand King Lear.
So you've really been involved in books all your life ever since you've been born?
All my life.
Love books.
I really have worked.
I was trained in the law, which is a discipline, and admitted to the bar, but never practiced.
I practiced two years before I went into the real estate business.
I've really worked so I could afford my habit.
You know, just like some people have a habit.
That was my habit.
Some I have it for drugs, some for women, some for gambling.
My habit has been Bibliomania.
At what point did you start indulging it, would you say?
I mean, as soon as you could afford it, you did?
I'd buy an occasional book.
I remember once on a trip to New York with my wife.
I went to Brentano's at the time.
I didn't know anything about conditions.
And I bought a Boswell at Brentano's in a modern binding that had been washed.
I mean, the book had been washed.
Boswell's Johnson.
Oh, I treasured it.
Which is a pretty nice book, actually.
Yeah.
And I didn't pay very much for it at the time.
Then I upgraded it.
The next one I got was in a contemporary binding from a very excellent library with good provenance.
The third copy that I have now on my shelves is in boards.
And my regret is that I didn't always tend to upgrade these things because there was something tempting me all the time.
So if you don't get the right book at the beginning, you often tend to keep it because you get involved, you want something else.
You tend to keep what?
Your first copy, more often than not.
Sometimes, you know.
Have you had any kind of a sentimental attachment to certain books that you've kept even though you've upgraded them?
When you get a book, you upgrade.
When you get the same book, you'll dispose of the earlier ones.
I'm sure I have.
I can't think of one at the moment.
But I'm sure that there are books that I have to which I'm sentimentally attached, and even when I could afford to get a better copy, did not.
Now I notice, as we mentioned earlier, you have the Streeter collection.
You have the Doheny, the Martin, the Garden.
Do you kind of quietly measure yourself against these other collectors?
No, these are princes of color.
These are collector princes.
I'm not.
I'm no Bradley Martin.
I'm no Garden Limited.
I'm no Mrs. Doheny.
Just me.
But you do have some splendid things.
I have some nice things.
You were saying that of the first folio, there were only six now in private hands?
Is that right?
According to Anthony James West, who had recently completed the provisional census, and I will send you a copy of it, by the way, he was able to find only six copies of the first folio in the United States in private hands, of which three that I have checked against Sidney Lee
are fragments.
Three are complete and without facsimile.
One of the three, complete and without facsimile, is mine.
The other is Mr. Scheide's, whose books are on deposit at Princeton.
And the third is the Manny copy, which is now Stuart Rose.
His is a rebound copy.
Mine is an old binding.
His is a modern binding.
To the best of his knowledge and research, he was able to find only six in the United States.
That's not many, is it?
And interestingly enough, there are only six in Britain, of which only three in Britain are complete.
There are only six copies?
In private hands.
Oh, in private hands.
There are only six in Britain.
And again, there almost miraculously, three are complete and three are fragments.
I looked up the ones that are complete.
Are they facsimile?
The ones that have fragments, do they have facsimile?
Sometimes they do.
And are most of the bindings different?
They must be.
Yes.
And you say your binding is essentially a contemporary binding?
You know, he says, Frank Brewer, Bremus, who assembled this great collector, calls them original.
I think that it's an old binding.
That's probably, my guess would be, if I were making an educated guess,
It could be late 17th century.
Have you ever seen the folios at the Folger Library?
No, I was at the Folger, but I've never seen the books there.
It's amazing.
They took me in there, just stacked like so many bars of bouillon.
They've got 90 copies there.
I don't think it's that many.
90?
Is it 90?
Well, most of them are.
There are a handful that are complete and without facsimile, though.
Most of them are fragments or partials of one kind.
It's fully one-third, I think, of every single copy, I think.
Yes, of the surviving copies.
Right.
Well, very nice.
What is that catalog here?
Oh, that's the Ashley.
Yeah.
Wise.
That is some other major catalogs.
Yeah, that's tough.
I've been looking for that catalog myself.
You've got all the great ones here.
Actually, I saw it in New York.
I should have bought it when I saw it.
What, the Mars Catalog?
Yeah.
It's an excellent catalog.
It's a wonderful catalog.
The Church Catalog is also a very great catalog.
That's correct.
I have that there.
The Church Catalog is a very fine catalog.
I know that catalog.
The Streeter, of course, is marvelous.
For Americana, there's none better.
I have a whole catalog.
I have a whole catalog here.
And I have a Jerome Kern.
I have a Jerome Kern here.
Do you have a Brinley?
No, I do not have a Brinley.
I have a Brinley.
I do not have a Brinley.
And that's a nice one.
That's a tough one to get.
I have a George Daniel.
That's very good.
I collect, this is one of my major collections is book catalogs.
Book catalogs.
And auction catalogs.
Well, auction catalogs, I couldn't possibly collect.
The ones I started getting, I started collecting catalogs, or not collecting, receiving catalogs, in 1965.